# CS 325 Practice Assignment 3

## Robert Detjens

---

### 1. For each of the following statements, respond *True*, *False*, or *Unknown*.

- If a problem is decidable, then it is in $P$. *True*
- For any decision problem, there exists an algorithm with exponential running time. *True*
- $P = NP$. *Unknown*
- All NP-complete problems can be solved in polynomial time. *Unknown*
- If there is a reduction from a problem $A$ to Circuit SAT, then $A$ is NP-hard. *True*
- If problem $A$ can be solved in polynomial time, then $A$ is in NP. *True*
- If problem $A$ is in NP, then it is NP-complete. *False*
- If problem $A$ is in NP, then there is no polynomial time algorithm for solving $A$. *Unknown*

### 2. A $k$-CNF formula is a conjunction (AND) of a set of clauses, where each clause is a disjunction (OR) of a set of exactly $k$ literals. For example,

$$
(a \lor b \lor c \lor \lnot d \lor \lnot e) \land (\lnot a \lor b \lor c \lor \lnot x \lor \lnot x) \land (\lnot x \lor y \lor c \lor \lnot d \lor a)
$$

is a 5-CNF. The $k$-SAT problem asks if a $k$-CNF formula is satisfiable. In class we saw that 3-SAT is NP-hard. In contrast, 2-SAT is polynomially solvable.

- Show that 4-SAT is NP-Complete.

  By reducing from CircuitSat, 4-SAT is shown to be NP-hard:

  - For some boolean circuit $C$, replace any gate with 3 or more inputs with a binary tree of 2-input gates to make circuit $C'$.
  - Turn $C'$ from a boolean circuit into a boolean formula with one clause per gate to make $\Phi_1$.
  - Replace each clause in $\Phi_1$ with a CNF formula to make $\Phi_2$.
  - Replace each clause in $\Phi_2$ with a 4-CNF formula to make $\Phi_4$ by expanding each clause with 2 new variables.

  Thus, if 4-SAT can be solved in polynomial time, then CircuitSat can be solved in polynomial time, implying that P = NP. Thus, 4Sat is NP-hard.

  *(Based on 3-SAT proof from the textbook)*

- Describe a polynomial time algorithm to solve 1-SAT.

  In pseudocode:

  ```py
  # each clause must be true to solve the formula since they are AND'd together.
  for each clause in formula:
    # 1-sat means just one input per clause
    # so only two possible clauses, with and without a negation
    if clause contains a negation:
      set clause_state to False
    else:
      set clause_state to True
  ```

$\pagebreak$

### 3. Suppose you are given a magic black box that can determine in polynomial time, given an arbitrary graph $G$, whether $G$ is 3-colorable. Describe and analyze a polynomial-time algorithm that either computes a proper 3-coloring of a given graph or correctly reports that no such coloring exists, using the magic black box as a subroutine.

In python / pseudocode:

```py
def color_graph (g):
  is_colorable = magic_black_box(g)

  if is_colorable:
    # greedy 3-coloring algo
    add a vertex to a queue Q
    for each vertex V in Q:
      set Vs color to the lowest color that its neighbors do not have
      add all neighbors of V that have not been colored to Q

  else:
    print "This graph is not 3-colorable."
```

Time analysis:

The black box runs in polynomial time. The coloring alg runs in linear time. Together, these both run in (polynomial + linear) time, or polynomial time.
