# CS 325 Practice Assignment 2

## Robert Detjens

---

### 1. Describe and analyze an algorithm to compute the number of maximal points in $P$ in $O(n\log{n})$ time.

Assuming that the points are given as an unsorted list of coordinate pairs; e.g. `[ (0,4), (1,0), (4,9) ]`

First, sort the list by the Y-coordinate from largest to smallest using merge sort ($O(n\log{n})$).

After the list has been sorted, add the first point -- the one with the largest Y-coordindate -- to a new list. This will hold the maximal points.

Then, loop through the sorted list and do the following on each element ($O(n)$). As each point is "below" the previous from the sort, we only need to compare x-coordinates.

- Check the x-coordinate of the current point against that of the lowest-known maximal point.
- If the current point's coordinate is larger than the maximal, add it to the list of maximal points as the new lowest.

This algorithm would have runtime $O(n\log{n})$ from the sort and $O(n)$ from the loop, totalling $O(n\log{n})$.

### 2. Describe an $O(\log{n})$ algorithm to search a bitonic sequence of length $n$ for a number $k$.

First, find the index of where the sequence/input array switches from ascending to descending:

- Check the midpoint value of the array against the precending and following value.
- If the preceding value is larger than the midpoint, recursively check the preceding half of the array in this same manner.
- If the following value is larger than the midpoint, recursively check the following half of the array in this same manner.
- If both the preceding and following values are smaller, return the index of the midpoint value.
- If the search area is of size 1, return the index of the only value.

Once the pivot value has been found, recursively check the subarrays on either side of the pivot for the desired value.

- Check the current midpoint value against the search value.
- If the midpoint is smaller, check the left or right half from the midpoint in this same manner, depending on whether this is the ascending or descending half of the main array respectively.
- If the midpoint is larger, check the right or left half from the midpoint in this same manner, depending on whether this is the ascending or descending half of the main array respectively.
- If the midpoint is the same, return the index of the midpoint.
- If the search area is of size 1, return the index if the search value matches the only value in the array, or -1 if it does not.

$\pagebreak$

### 3. Describe an efficient algorithm to compute the length of the longest oscillating subsequence of an arbitrary array $A$ of integers.

An algorithm for this would be of at least $O(n)$ time, as each element needs to be compared at least once to discern if it is larger or smaller than the preceding element.

We will keep a running count of the current and longest oscillation lengths, and whether we have just risen or fallen in the oscillation.

For each element in the array except the last:

- Check if the current element is larger than the next.
- If it is and we just rose in the oscillation, or if it is not and we just fell, the current subsequence is over. Compare the current length to the longest length and update it if neccesary. Reset the current length to 0 and continue, now with a new subsequence.
- Otherwise, the subsequence is still oscillating, so increment the length of the current oscillation subsequence and continue.
